[Music]
good morning and welcome to breakfast
with roger johnson and victoria fritz
hello good morning our headlines today
reflections after the day the queen and
the nation bid farewell to the duke of
edinburgh
one of the defining images her majesty
sitting alone
as she said goodbye to her husband of 73
years
the royal family will continue to grieve
this week although the period of
national mourning has come to an end
also this morning the melting of the
world's biggest iceberg
once a quarter of the size of wales
celebrating 70 years of britain's first
national park this is one of the most
popular
areas of the peat district but just
imagine before the national park was
formed
you weren't allowed to walk across open
more land
like this good morning no
quadruple from manchester city as
chelsea beat them in their fa cup
semi-final at wembley
good morning it's a dry and sunny day
across england
and wales and a little warmer than
yesterday further north
there's more in the way of cloud and
some light patchy rain for scotland and
northern ireland
all the details coming up shortly
[Music]
hello there it's sunday the 18th of
april our top story
the royal family has honored the duke of
edinburgh's humor and humanity
as he was laid to rest at st george's
chapel windsor
the service was restrained in line with
the duke's wishes and coronavirus
guidelines
the queen sat alone just days before she
turns
95 princes william and harry were seen
chatting together as they left the
service
and the royal family will continue to
mourn the loss of prince philip this
week
while the period of national mourning
has come to an end
our royal correspondent nicholas
whitchell looks back on the funeral that
was watched
by millions of people around the world
drawn up in the spring sunshine on the
castle's quadrangle
were the military detachments they stood
with heads bowed
and rifles reversed
the scale was smaller than would have
been the case without the pandemic
though that's hardly something that
would have troubled the duke
he after all had choreographed much of
what was to follow
the land rover hearse which the duke had
helped to design
moved to its position by the state
entrance
[Music]
the duke's coffin was born on the
shoulders of a bearer party from the
grenadier guards
the coffin was covered with the duke's
personal standard
and surmounted with his sword and naval
cap and a wreath from the queen
with great care it was placed on the
hearse
behind the hearse were members of the
royal family who were walking to the
chapel
headed by the prince of wales
a royal salute sounded and the first
sight of the queen
accompanied by a lady in waiting in the
state bentley
taking position as the order was given
for the procession to step
off
[Music]
close by was one of the horse-drawn
carriages the duke had taken such
pleasure in driving
on the seat his cap and gloves
among the members of the family walking
behind the coffin
were princes william and harry the focus
of
so much attention walking with their
cousin peter phillips between them
the procession wound its way past the
castle's round tower
by the side entrance to st george's
chapel other members of the royal family
stood with their heads bowed
the queen made her way into the chapel
pausing to look back as the hearse
moved on down the hill
[Music]
on the wreath of white roses and lilies
on the coffin
was a card on which were the handwritten
words
in loving memory before they entered the
chapel
the bearer party paused as a field gun
signaled the start of a one-minute
silence
the service began with a tribute to the
duke from the dean of windsor
we have been inspired by his unwavering
loyalty
to our queen by his service
to the nation and the commonwealth
by his courage fortitude and faith
the small congregation sat in its family
groups
the queen sat alone so did prince harry
after the prayers and the commendation a
distinctive touch
typical of the duke royal marine buglers
sounded the royal navy's call
to action stations
[Music]
and finally at the end of her husband's
funeral the choir sang the national
anthem
seldom can its words have had greater
[Music]
poignancy
the family mourners departed a widowed
queen to her castle
and two brothers william and harry
walked away together
alongside the duchess of cambridge the
duke of edinburgh is gone
but the brothers know that he would have
wanted the family to move on
and for differences to be healed
nicholas witchell
bbc news
well our correspondent helena wilkinson
is at windsor
forest uh helena although of course the
official mourning period
is now over this is still very much a
time of reflection isn't it for many
yes absolutely and the royal family will
continue to observe
a further week's morning we expect the
flags that were lowered to half-mast
after the duke died last friday to be
raised later on this morning
but here very much in windsor a day of
reflection
after what was a very intimate private
family funeral that was watched by
millions
across the world and it was a funeral as
we've just heard
that had been planned by the duke of
edinburgh over many
years from the land rover that he
designed and modified
to the songs that were sung in the
chapel
service yesterday but the most striking
image of course from yesterday and the
saddest of images was the queen
herself in the chapel of course over the
last year she had bubbled with her
partner her husband
prince philip but yesterday she sat
alone because of covert restrictions
in the chapel itself and she looked onto
the coffin
and she said goodbye to her husband of
73 years
and last night the royal family tweeted
this very poignant
picture of the duke of edinburgh after
the funeral
thanks very much helena
now more than 200 000 new covered cases
have been recorded
in india for three days in a row taking
the total number
to nearly 14 and a half million now that
makes it the world's second
worst infected country behind the united
states
we're joined now by our south asia
correspondent regina vidanathan
who is in delhi for us this morning
regina thank you for
joining us this morning huge numbers uh
which must be causing a good deal of
concern
yeah huge numbers and actually in the
last uh half an hour or so we got the
latest uh figures for the last 24 hours
um another record increase we'll keep
saying that day after day here at the
moment
more than 261 and a half thousand
new cases and more than 1500
deaths and it is worth pointing out that
some experts believe
that the death toll and the case toll is
actually
far higher uh we've seen in some parts
of the country reporters counting the
number of bodies
in predatorians and saying it just
doesn't match with the figures that are
officially being released so
it could be an even far higher toll we
are also
hearing and seeing distressing scenes
around the country families
trying to get their loved ones into
hospitals ambulances
lining up outside trying to get patients
in
and on social media lots of messages
desperately being posted by people
saying
have you got a bed have you got oxygen
have you got medicine it really does
feel
like a very dire situation here at the
moment regina thank you very much indeed
now the two russian men suspected of
carrying out a poison attack in
salisbury in
2018 have now been linked to an
explosion
at an arms depot in the czech republic
the czech authorities have issued
pictures
of alexander petrov and ruslan bashirov
who they say were in the country
when the blast happened in 2014 leaving
two people dead
a senior russian parliamentarian has
called the claim
absurd now
the time is 10 6 in the morning i just
want to tell you about this story what
was
once the world's largest iceberg has
finally broken apart a68 as it was known
covered an area of nearly 2 300 square
miles when it broke away from antarctica
in 2017. yeah the satellite images now
show that the megaburg
has virtually gone it's broken down into
countless small fragments that the u.s
national ice center says are no longer
worth tracking
here's our science correspondent
victoria gill
a one billion ton block of ice
when iceberg a68 broke away from
antarctica back in 2017
it measured more than 2 300 square miles
a quarter the size of wales it was only
by imaging it from space that scientists
could actually follow the massive
icebergs journey as it
inched its way north at one point it was
on a direct collision course with the
antarctic island of south georgia
potentially threatening to cut off vast
populations of penguins and seals
but it was off that coast in the open
ocean swell that the world's largest
iceberg broke apart and now that it's
officially been declared deceased
the scientists who've been following its
journey say they're surprised that it
survived as long as it did
so this thing is incredibly fragile and
flexible as it moved around the oceans
it lasted for years like that as it
moved around but eventually broke into
four or five pieces and then those broke
up again but the
end point for some of these fragments
was quite interesting because
just very suddenly overnight they just
fragmented into
millions of little tiny pieces and you
can see that on the satellite data
and that process i think is is something
that needs studying a little bit more
because it might tell us a little bit
about how ice shelves will break up in
the future
a68 being the size of a small country
made it the focus of
global media attention but the breaking
away or carving of these giant icebergs
is a natural part of the ebb
and flow of the dynamic ice shelf does
the whole
journey and the breakup and demise of an
iceberg of this scale
does it give you any insight into how
climate change is going to affect the
ice sheet
at large in antarctica one event on its
own
can't tell us that much but what we're
looking at is the
regularity of these events are they
becoming more frequent
and then iceberg carving is a big factor
in iceland
from antarctica so if these island
carving events are becoming more
frequent then it's really important
um factor that we need to we need to be
looking at and researching
while a68 will be remembered as a social
media star that was visible from
space scientists will now be turning
their attention to the newest
chasm on the edge of the vast ice sheet
and the next
giant berg to set off on its own epic
journey
victoria gill bbc news
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news